
                       Foucault Pendulum
                   by John Walker (Fourmilab)
                    http://www.fourmilab.ch/

In February, 1851 Léon Foucault invited people to the Paris
Observatory "to observe the rotation of the Earth", then, a few
weeks later, installed a much larger apparatus in Paris's
Panthéon.  The apparatus Foucault invented to directly show the
Earth's rotation, now called a Foucault pendulum, took advantage
of a unique property of a swinging pendulum: the plane in which
the pendulum bob swings (unless perturbed by outside forces such
as wind or friction) remains fixed with respect to the distant
stars.  As the Earth rotates, the plane in which the pendulum
swings will appear to rotate, or precess, through time.  The
rate of precession depends upon the latitude at which the
pendulum is installed: at the north or south pole, it would make
one revolution per sidereal day (the time it takes the distant
stars to return to the same position in the sky as the day
before).  At the latitude of Paris, Foucault's pendulum
precessed around 11.3° per hour.  (The precession rate goes as
the sine of the latitude.)

Fourmilab's Foucault Pendulum brings this demonstration into
Second Life.  You can install the pendulum wherever you wish to
lend a bit of the nineteenth century discovery of science to
your decor.  The pendulum is highly configurable, and can be
customised to your preferences via chat commands.  In addition,
the model, script, and all associated materials are delivered
with full permissions so you can modify them as you like or use
them as the foundation for your own projects.

GETTING STARTED
============

The pendulum is delivered as a ready-to-use object; there is no
need to unpack a box.  After receiving the Fourmilab Foucault
Pendulum object, simply rez it in-world in some location where
you're permitted to do that (your own property or a public
sandbox).  The pendulum initially comes with a string five
metres long between the pivot and the bob.  When the pendulum
starts, it begins to listen on nearby chat on channel 1851 (the
year Foucault first demonstrated his pendulum).  Typing:

    /1851 help

in nearby chat will deliver this document to you.

Touch anywhere on the pendulum and it will begin to swing back
and forth.  The period of its swing depends upon the length of
the string (we'll see later how to adjust that).  You'll notice
a blue bar below the bob (if you don't see it, edit the pendulum
and move it up until the bar appears).  This is called the
"Plane Indicator" and shows the plane in which the pendulum is
swinging. This will appear to slowly rotate, or "precess", as
the Earth rotates.  By default, the pendulum is configured for a
latitude of 45 degrees North, but you can set this as you wish.
Three grey hemispherical markers appear near one end of the
Plane Indicator; these show the hourly precession of the plane,
as the previous hour, next hour, and hour after that.  As the
pendulum continues to swing, the plane indicator will slowly
move from the previous hour to the next and, upon reaching it,
the hour indicators will "walk" one hour around the circle the
Plane Indicator is slowly tracing out.  The current time in
Second Life Time (PST/PDT) appears as floating text above the
pendulum, and the hours marked by the hour indicators appears
above them.

Of course you can sit on the pendulum bob and ride it!

CONTROLLING AND CONFIGURING
======================

The main means of controlling the configuring the experiment is
via messages sent in nearby chat on its control channel (1851 by
default, but see the "channel" command below to change it if you
wish).  To send a command, type a slash, the channel number, and
the command and any parameters in the local chat box, for
example:

    /1851 set latitude 33

which would set the latitude of the pendulum to 33 degrees
north.

The following commands are available.

    access who
        Set which classes of users can send commands via chat.
        The who parameter should be one of public (anybody),
        group (members of the group to which the pendulum
        belongs), or owner (owner of the pendulum only).  The
        owner is always able to send commands regardless of this
        setting.

    channel n
        Change the chat channel on which the pendulum listens
        for commands to n.  The new channel is echoed in chat to
        confirm the change.  Default 1851.

    help
        Give this document to the requester.

    reset
        Reset the experiment to its initial state.  Note that
        this does not change persistent configuration settings
        such as latitude, gravity, and swing angle.

    restart
        Perform a hard restart, equivalent to creating a new
        copy of the experiment.  The only setting which persists
        across a restart is the string length.

    set variable args
        Set the named variable to the given argument(s).  The
        following variables may be set.

        amplitude angle
            The amplitude of the pendulum's swing is set to the
            angle in degrees.  Note that this is the excursion
            from vertical in both directions on each swing, or
            half the total angle subtended by the swing.  For
            amplitudes greater than 10 degrees, simulation of
            the pendulum's motion will be imprecise.  Default 8
            degrees.

        animation time
            The time step for animation is set to time, given in
            seconds with a decimal fraction.  Setting time too
            large will result in jerky motion, while too large
            will slow things down and create lag due to script
            overhead. Default 0.1 seconds.

        gravity accel
            Set the gravitational acceleration fo the specified
            value in metres/second^2.  Default is 9.80665, the
            standard value at Earth's surface, which you can reset
            with an accel setting of "earth".

        latitude degrees
            The latitude at which the pendulum is installed is
            specified in degrees, positive for north and
            negative for south.  Default 45.

        length l
            The length of the string from the pivot to the bob
            is set to l, in metres.  This adjusts the position
            of the bob and other objects accordingly and you may
            have to reposition the pendulum afterward to keep it
            from running into the ground or other objects.  This
            setting persists even across a restart command.
            Default 5 metres.

        precession time
            The precession of the plane of the pendulum's swing
            will be update every time seconds.  Since the
            precession changes slowly, there is no need to
            update this more than once a minute.  Default 60
            seconds.

        shiny value
            The shininess (specular reflection coefficient) of the bob
            and pivot are set to the specified value, between 0 and 3.
            A value of 0 is a completely matte surface, while 3 is the
            maximum shininess, like polished metal.  Warning: setting
            shininess greater than 0 may result in the bob and pivot
            not displaying in some viewers if the "Advanced Lighting
            Model" is not selected.  Default 0 (matte).

        sidereal time
            Set the length of the sidereal day to time seconds.
            The sidereal day is the time it takes for distant
            stars to return to the same position as the day
            before.  The only reason to change this is to
            simulate the pendulum's being on another planet.
            Default 86164.0905 seconds, which you can reset
            with a time of "earth".

        solar time
            Set the length of the mean solar day (time between
            successive local noons).  Change this to simulate
            other planets.  Default 86400 seconds, which you can
            reset with a time of "earth".

    start
        Start the simulation (pendulum swinging and precession).

    stat
        Print a variety of statistics.  Some of the statistics
        may not make sense unless the simulation has been
        started at least once.

    stop
        Stop the simulation.  You can restart the simulation
        from that point with a subsequent start command.

    test n
        Perform built-in test n.  This permits running
        experimental code when developing the simulation
        script.  Look in the source code of the script to see
        which tests are currently included.

    time cmd
        Perform a variety of commands cmd relating to time.

        on
            Show the current time and hours for the hour
            indicators.

        off
            Hide the current time and hours for hour indicators.

        utc
            Show time in co-ordinated universal (Greenwich mean)
            time.

        wall
            Show time in Second Life (PST/PDT) time.  This is
            the time shown in the title bar of many Second Life
            viewers.

        zone offset
            Show time in local time with a specified offset from
            universal (UTC) time.  The offset is positive if the
            local time is later than UTC and negative if
            earlier.  The offset may be a decimal number to
            accommodate time zones which are not an even hour
            offset from UTC.

    trace what on/off
        Enable or disable tracing of various parts of the
        simulation.

        hours
            Adjustment of hour markers

        period
            Measure actual period of pendulum swing for
            comparison with computed period.

        precession
            Computation and updating of precession and the Plane
            Indicator

        swing
            Swing of the pendulum

Configuration Notecards
-----------------------------

When the simulation is installed or restarted, if a notecard is present
in its inventory named "Initialisation on restart", commands will be
read from it, line by line, and processed before the simulation starts.
Blank lines and those beginning with an octothorpe ("#") are ignored.

Similarly, when the simulation is reset, commands from a "Reset commands"
notecard, if any, will be processed.

Both of these notecards are fully modifiable so you can customise them
as you wish.

LICENSE
======

This product (software, documents, images, and models) is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0
International License.
    http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/
    https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/legalcode
You are free to copy and redistribute this material in any
medium or format, and to remix, transform, and build upon the
material for any purpose, including commercially.  You must give
credit, provide a link to the license, and indicate if changes
were made.  If you remix, transform, or build upon this
material, you must distribute your contributions under the same
license as the original.

Source code for this project is maintained on and available from the
GitHub repository:
    https://github.com/Fourmilab/foucault_pendulum
